Anthrax .
Crimean Congo haemorrhagic fever .
Echinococcus granulosus .
Echinococcus multilocularis .
Equine encephalomyelitis .
Heartwater .
Infection with Aujeszky's disease virus .
Infection with bluetongue virus .
Infection with Brucella abortus, Brucella melitensis and Brucella suis .
Infection with epizootic haemorrhagic disease .
Infection with foot and mouth disease virus .
Infection with Mycobacterium tuberculosis complex .
Infection with rabies virus .
Infection with Rift Valley fever virus .
Infection with rinderpest virus .
Infection with Trichinella spp. .
Japanese encephalitis .
New world screwworm .
Old world screwworm .
Paratuberculosis .
Q fever .
Surra .
Tularemia .
West Nile Fever .
Bovine anaplasmosis .
Bovine babesiosis .
Bovine genital campylobacteriosis .
Bovine spongiform encephalopathy .
Bovine viral diarrhoea .
Enzootic Bovine Leukosis .
Haemorrhagic septicaemia .
Infectious bovine rhinotracheitis/infectious pustular vulvovaginitis .
Infection with lumpy skin disease virus .
Infection with Mycoplasma mycoides subsp. mycoides SC .
Theileriosis .
Trichomonosis .
Trypanosomosis .
Caprine arthritis .
encephalitis .
Contagious agalactia .
Contagious caprine pleuropneumonia .
Infection with Chlamydophila abortus .
Infection with peste des petits ruminants virus .
Maedi Visna .
Nairobi sheep disease .
Ovine epididymitis .
Salmonellosis .
Scrapie .
Sheep pox and goat pox .
Contagious equine metritis .
Dourine .
Equine encephalomyelitis .
Equine infectious anaemia .
Equine influenza .
Equine piroplasmosis .
Infection with African horse sickness virus .
Infection with Equid herpesvirus-1 .
Infection with equine arteritis virus .
Infection with Burkholderia mallei .
Venezuelan equine encephalomyelitis .
Infection with African swine fever virus .
Classical swine fever .
Infection with porcine reproductive and respiratory syndrome virus .
Infection with Taenia solium .
Nipah virus encephalitis .
Transmissible gastroenteritis .
Avian chlamydiosis .
Avian infectious bronchitis .
Avian infectious laryngotracheitis .
Avian mycoplasmosis .
Avian mycoplasmosis .
Duck virus hepatitis .
Fowl typhoid .
Infection with High Pathogenicity Avian Influenza viruses .
Infection with Influenza A viruses of high pathogenicity in birds other than poultry incl. wild birds .
Infection with Newcastle disease virus .
Infectious bursal disease .
Low Pathogenic Avian Influenza Transmissible to Humans .
Pullorum disease .
Turkey rhinotracheitis .
Myxomatosis .
Rabbit haemorrhagic disease .
Infection of honey bees with Melissococcus plutonius .
Infection of honey bees with Paenibacillus larvae .
Infestation of honey bees with Acarapis woodi .
Infestation of honey bees with Tropilaelaps spp. .
Infestation of honey bees with Varroa spp. .
Infestation with Aethina tumida .
Camelpox .
Leishmaniosis .
Infection with Aphanomyces invadens .
Infection with epizootic haematopoietic necrosis virus .
Infection with Gyrodactylus salaris .
Infection with HPR-deleted or HPRO infectious salmon anaemia virus .
Infection with infectious haematopoietic necrosis .
Infection with koi herpesvirus .
Infection with red sea bream iridovirus .
Infection with salmonid alphavirus .
Infection with spring viraemia of carp virus .
Infection with viral haemorrhagic septicaemia virus .
Tilapia Lake Virus .
Infection with abalone herpesvirus .
Infection with Bonamia exitiosa .
Infection with Bonamia ostreae .
Infection with Marteilia refringens .
Infection with Perkinsus marinus .
Infection with Perkinsus olseni .
Infection with Xenohaliotis californiensis .
Acute hepatopancreatic necrosis disease .
Infection with Aphanomyces astaci .
Infection with Decapod Iridescent Virus 1 .
Infection with Hepatobacter penaei .
Infection with infectious hypodermal and haematopoietic necrosis virus .
Infection with infectious myonecrosis virus .
Infection with Macrobrachium rosenbergii nodavirus .
Infection with Taura syndrome virus .
Infection with white spot syndrome virus .
Infection with yellow head virus genotype 1 .
Infection with Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis .
Infection with Batrachochytrium salamandrivorans .
Infection with Ranavirus species .
