excerptArr[0]="Ovine abortion investigations for the 2024 lambing season were performed by APHA, APHA partner postmortem providers, and SRUC Veterinary Services between January and June 2024, with February and March being the busiest months. Veterinary Investigation Officers (VIOs) provide zoonoses advice to private veterinary surgeons to pass on to their farm clients when potentially zoonotic organisms are identified. Potentially zoonotic organisms that may be detected during ovine abortion investigations include Chlamydia abortus, Toxoplasma gondii, Campylobacter sp., Listeria sp., Salmonella sp., Yersinia sp. and Coxiella burnetii. Figure 1 comprises a chart which includes the most common ovine abortion diagnoses for 2024."
excerptArr[1]="In the Q1 2024 quarterly report it was reported that APHA and our partner postmortem providers detected ticks on livestock throughout the winter months. The unseasonably warmer weather may have contributed to increased tick activity earlier in the year than expected."
excerptArr[2]="Human campylobacteriosis is usually caused by the thermophilic Campylobacter species C. jejuni and C. coli, which can be found in a wide range of livestock, poultry and wildlife species. Poultry and poultry meat products are the main sources for human infection, and campylobacteriosis is the most commonly reported bacterial cause of food poisoning. The United Kingdom Food Security Report 2021 indicated that there were 54,979 laboratory-confirmed infections in 2020, 68,006 in 2019, and 67,984 in 2018. Note, there may have been an impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the 2020 figures."
excerptArr[3]="Targeted surveillance by APHA for leptospirosis is variously achieved by analysis of results from:"
excerptArr[4]="Since Mycobacterium bovis became notifiable in all species in 2006, the number of samples examined by APHA has increased, particularly from pets and camelids. Samples from pigs are mainly submitted by Official Veterinarians at abattoirs."
excerptArr[5]="PCR is used to confirm the presence of Coxiella burnetii, typically following the identification of suspicious acid-fast bodies in Modified Ziehl-Neelsen (MZN)-stained smears of placentae (or foetal samples). Confirmation of Q fever as a cause of fetopathy requires histopathology and immunohistochemistry of placental tissue, in addition to a positive PCR result. In each case when C. burnetii is detected by PCR, public health colleagues are informed of the incident and the zoonotic potential of this organism is highlighted to the farmer and private veterinary surgeon, with the provision of an advisory sheet about Q fever."
excerptArr[6]="Streptococcus suis isolates from diagnostic material submitted to APHA and SRUC Veterinary Investigation Centres are typed further for disease surveillance purposes. The submission numbers and serotypes from porcine diagnostic material submitted during the period April to June 2024 are shown below, with data for the previous 2 years (Q2 2023 and Q2 2022) for comparison."
excerptArr[7]="The European Food Safety Authority (EFSA Journal 2007, 583, 1 to 64) highlighted the significance of toxoplasmosis as a foodborne zoonosis and the need to improve surveillance in this field. Serological examinations for Toxoplasma gondii using the latex agglutination test (LAT) are undertaken by the APHA on sera submitted to Veterinary Investigation Centres. The findings presented below provide a summary of the serological status of samples submitted for diagnosis, monitoring and screening purposes during the period April to June 2024, but do not constitute a structured survey. Positive samples, as defined here, have LAT titres of 1/64 or greater and indicate a history of exposure to this protozoan parasite. Toxoplasmosis as a cause of fetopathy in sheep and goats is diagnosed through antigen (PCR) testing of placental cotyledon."
excerptArr[8]="Investigations to assist in human outbreaks of cryptosporidiosis linked to direct contact with animals are undertaken at the request of Consultants in Communicable Disease Control (CsCDC) of the UKHSA and Public Health Wales (PHW) and in collaboration with the National Cryptosporidium Reference Unit, Swansea, and follow jointly agreed guidelines. Consultants in Public Health Medicine (CsPHM) lead on these zoonoses investigations in Scotland."
excerptArr[9]="Shiga toxin-producing Escherichia coli (STEC, formerly known as VTEC) outbreak investigations are undertaken, according to agreed guidelines, at the request of CsCDC of UKHSA and PHW (CsPHM in Scotland) where an animal-associated source is suspected. These investigations often also involve collaboration with other organisations, including the environmental health departments of local authorities and the Health and Safety Executive (HSE). Determination of virulence factors, including shiga toxin genes and comparison of human and animal isolates by whole genome sequence (WGS) analysis, are performed by the Gastrointestinal Bacteria Reference Unit (GBRU), UKHSA Colindale. If isolates from animals circumstantially implicated in outbreaks have an indistinguishable WGS profile to those from human cases, this is taken as confirmatory evidence of the epidemiological link. Other STECs or WGS types may be detected incidentally during the investigation of animal premises."
excerptArr[10]="Corynebacterium ulcerans was first isolated from cases of throat infection in humans in 1926, with zoonotic outbreaks initially associated with direct contact with farm animals or consumption of unpasteurised milk. More recently zoonotic incidents have been associated with contact with companion animals such as dogs and cats. C. ulcerans can be asymptomatically carried in the throat of some dogs and cats. C. ulcerans has also been isolated from skin lesions, nasal discharge, and other anatomical sites of clinically unwell dogs and cats. The organism can produce diphtheria toxin, which can produce human disease with the same clinical signs as cutaneous or respiratory diphtheria caused by C. diphtheriae."
excerptArr[11]="For all ruminant abortion investigations and reports of the detection of C. burnetii, APHA provides comprehensive advice to private veterinary surgeons, including information about optimising ruminant abortion investigations, laboratory testing, and zoonoses advice for private vets to pass on to their farmer clients."
excerptArr[12]="Chlamydia psittaci, the causative agent of avian chlamydiosis (psittacosis), can cause serious human illness. The disease has been described in many species of birds, particularly in parrots, parakeets, budgerigars, and cockatiels. Other commonly affected birds include pigeons and doves. Ducks and turkeys may also be affected, but chickens less frequently. Birds can carry the organism without any signs of disease, or they can become mildly to severely ill."
excerptArr[13]="Since July 2020, there has been a large increase in the number of incidents of canine brucellosis due to infection with Brucella canis. APHA, in liaison with health protection agencies across Great Britain, has been involved in investigating these incidents. The UK Chief Veterinary Officer advised on this potential zoonotic disease in a letter published in the Vet Record in February 2021. Amendments to the Zoonoses Order in 2021 added dogs to the list of animals for which brucellosis is a reportable disease in Great Britain."
excerptArr[14]="Although leptospirosis diagnoses are not numerous, the autumn occurrence of systemic leptospirosis has been noted in previous years and may relate to rodent feed sources becoming scarce and ambient temperatures falling, resulting in rodents (and possibly other wildlife) coming into greater contact with pigs when seeking food and shelter."
excerptArr[15]="Analysis of ovine abortion data for Great Britain held in the APHA’s Veterinary Investigation Diagnosis Analysis database found that campylobacteriosis was the most common cause of abortion in sheep for the 2023 lambing season, closely followed by toxoplasmosis and Chlamydia abortus (the cause of ovine enzootic abortion). The prevalence of toxoplasmosis in 2023 was similar to previous years whereas cases of enzootic abortion have gradually decreased in recent years. Abortion caused by Campylobacter species tends to peak every three to four years; the exact reason for this is unknown but is suspected to be the result of the gradual replacement of immune animals with naïve replacements. As well as abortion, infection can also result in the birth of live, weak lambs. Up to 20 % of a group may abort but ewes generally remain well in themselves, although infection with C. jejuni can occasionally cause a mild transient diarrhoea."
excerptArr[16]="In 2023 there was a notable increase in bovine test requests for the APHA Coxiella burnetii PCR test. There are several reasons for this increase. APHA are part of an international consortium where extensive research is in progress to improve our understanding of C. burnetii. The aim of this research is to improve molecular surveillance techniques for C. burnetii and to assess host adaptation and virulence factors of different C. burnetii strains, including the zoonotic potential of different C. burnetii strains in Europe including the UK. The APHA Q fever National Reference Laboratory have been performing PCR testing on a range of tissue samples from bovine and caprine abortions which has increased the number of C. burnetii positive samples, especially those for cattle submissions given that these are substantially higher than goat submissions. The samples which have resulted in the detection of C. burnetii will undergo additional research."
excerptArr[17]="England & Wales: In 2023 there were a total of 142 Campylobacter isolates (5 in Quarter 4) identified by the APHA Starcross laboratory, which were mainly from ruminant abortions. Scotland: SRUC Veterinary Services had a total of 348 Campylobacter isolates during 2023 (80 in Quarter 4)"
excerptArr[18]="Between January and December 2023, a total of 247 kidney specimens (kidneys from 46 cattle, 191 pigs, 1 deer, 6 foxes and 3 wild boar) were examined by real-time PCR for pathogenic leptospires. There were two positive kidney test results, one from a pig and one from a fox. 29 of the submitted samples (13 cattle samples and 16 pig samples) were unsuitable for testing (these were too autolysed)."
excerptArr[19]="The APHA testing protocol has changed, and since 30 March 2022 all new submissions from non-bovine animals have been tested by PCR, which detects the M. tuberculosis complex and M. bovis. If positive for the M. tuberculosis complex and M. bovis, the sample is sent for culture to harvest growth to establish the WGS clade of M. bovis."
excerptArr[20]="Comparisons of Q-fever data with previous years should be made with caution because from April 2021 Q fever has been a reportable disease. In 2023 there was a notable increase in bovine test requests for the APHA Coxiella burnetii PCR test (commented on in section 1.2). It is important to note that an increase in the detection of C. burnetii does not necessarily equate to an increased prevalence."
excerptArr[21]="Table 3. Streptococcus suis serotypes from porcine diagnostic material, 2021 to 2023"
excerptArr[22]="51 ovine samples and no caprine samples were submitted for Toxoplasma serology in 2023. Of the 51 ovine samples 26 were seropositive. Toxoplasma fetopathy figures for sheep and goats are provided in Table 1."
excerptArr[23]="In 2023 APHA assisted with the public health investigation of seven C. parvum outbreaks of human disease linked with an animal origin (five in England and two in Wales). One of the outbreaks was an incident of cryptosporidiosis epidemiologically linked to a milk vending machine. Of the other human C. parvum outbreaks, three were epidemiologically linked to open farms, two to commercial farms (one of these had diversified into an open farm), and one to a farm shop premises which had animals on site. More information is available in the Zoonoses and Veterinary Public Health quarterly report for April to June 2023."
excerptArr[24]="During 2023 APHA assisted with the investigation of two Shiga toxin-producing Escherichia coli (STEC) human outbreaks which were epidemiologically linked to separate animal-contact visitor attraction premises. For both outbreaks APHA visited the premises at the request of the Incident Management Team (IMT) and collected fresh environmental (floor, field, or pen) faeces samples from an epidemiologically appropriate range of animal species."
excerptArr[25]="During 2023 APHA were involved in assisting the UKHSA Health Protection Teams with 39 toxigenic Corynebacterium ulcerans incidents. In addition APHA assisted with a feline animal index case that was located in Wales, working with Public Health Wales."
excerptArr[26]="APHA provided advice at the request of an Incident Management Team (IMT) during the third quarter in 2023 following the detection of C. burnetii by PCR in a placental sample from an aborted cow. On the affected  farm four cows had recently aborted and there had also been four premature (near-term) calvings in a group of 250 autumn calving dairy cows. The farm was not usually open to the public, however they had held an open day in the summer. The IMT were aware that C. burnetii is present on many farms around the country, as shown by wider bulk milk sampling, and were also aware of the need to consider proportionality of the public health response."
excerptArr[27]="During 2023 there were no VIDA diagnoses of avian chlamydiosis, not were there any reports to APHA of the detection of Chlamydia psittaci in psittacine birds."
excerptArr[28]="During Q4 (October to December) 2023, there were 51 epidemiologically separate incidents which had evidence of infection with Brucella canis. These 51 incidents had moderate to high risk factors (which comprised positive serology plus at least one other risk factor) for B. canis infection. All of the incidents were reported to the relevant public health authorities. Investigations into these incidents resulted in the testing of 53 dogs in total (inclusive of the index), of which 51 were found serologically positive for B. canis."
excerptArr[29]="Within the document there is information with additional links for a range of diseases, many parasitic. The following diseases are included: Babesiosis, Dirofilaria repens, Echinococcus multilocularis, Ehrlichiosis, Heartworm, Leishmaniasis, Onchocerca lupi parasitosis, Rabies, Sporotrichosis, Thelaziasis and Tongue worm (Linguatula serrata)."
excerptArr[30]="A nine-month-old chicken had shown signs of splayed legs and paresis. Post-mortem examination showed no significant gross lesions. Histopathological examination revealed a severe systemic protozoal infection with major involvement of the central nervous system, heart, and eye. The severity of the changes associated with the protozoal infection would have accounted for the neurological signs reported clinically. Immunohistochemistry for Toxoplasma gondii revealed specific positive labelling of numerous protozoal tachyzoites within foci of necrosis and inflammation in the brain and specific labelling of bradyzoite cysts associated with extraocular muscle fibres and associated nerves in the eye, confirming a diagnosis of toxoplasmosis in the bird. Although chickens are known to be susceptible to T. gondii infection, which can be acquired following ingestion of oocysts from cats as the definitive host for the parasite, clinical signs resulting from infection appear to be unusual. The findings from this bird indicate that toxoplasmosis should be considered in the differential diagnosis of neurological signs in chickens, particularly backyard and smallholding birds that may have access to cats. The consumption of raw or undercooked meat from contaminated birds represents a potential risk of zoonotic infection. This case was described in the APHA Q1 2022 Great Britain avian quarterly report: disease surveillance and emerging threats and was published in the Vet Record APHA monthly surveillance report in March 2022."
excerptArr[31]="The Cattle Expert Group reported cases of Escherichia coli septicaemia in older calves in both Q2 and Q3 2022 GB cattle quarterly reports. These cases are in contrast with the customary presentation of septicaemic E. coli infection in neonatal calves, most having received insufficient colostrum. Poor environmental hygiene and other managemental factors can also be contributory. In comparison, all calves in the recent investigations, with one exception of an unweaned three-month-old calf, had been weaned. Similar cases in non-neonatal calves have been identified in several herds, in England, Wales and Scotland. There has been no consistent evidence of other diseases. Further investigations into the E. coli types are ongoing and further updates including information regarding zoonotic potential will be provided in later editions of the FZ2100 Zoonoses and Veterinary Public Health Reports."
excerptArr[32]="England & Wales: In 2022 there were a total of 101 Campylobacter isolates (6 in Quarter 4) identified by the APHA Starcross laboratory, which were mainly from ruminant abortions. Scotland: SRUC Veterinary Services had a total of 336 Campylobacter isolates during 2022 (86 in Quarter 4)"
excerptArr[33]="Between January and December 2022, a total of 225 kidney specimens (kidneys from 57 cattle, 156 pigs, 3 sheep, 1 deer, 1 alpaca, 1 wild boar, 5 foxes, and 1 other mammal, species not stated) were examined by real-time PCR for pathogenic leptospires. There were 5 positive kidney test results: 1 cattle, 1 pig, and 3 foxes."
excerptArr[34]="Mycobacterium bovis in non-bovine animals was detected on 82 occasions from a range of species: 10 alpaca, 4 cats, 51 deer, 9 pigs, 6 sheep, 1 wild boar and 1 zoo mammal (species unknown)."
excerptArr[35]="During the period January to December 2022 a total of 47 samples (from 41 submissions) were tested for the presence of Coxiella burnetii by PCR at the APHA Q fever National Reference Laboratory, Penrith Veterinary Investigation Centre. The samples comprised 22 placental samples, 20 foetal fluid samples, 1 foetal stomach contents sample, 2 spleen samples, 1 foetal tissue unspecified sample and 1 bulk milk sample. The C. burnetii PCR has been validated for placental and foetal fluid samples, although other samples are also tested."
excerptArr[36]="Table 2. Streptococcus suis serotypes from porcine diagnostic material, 2020 to 2022"
excerptArr[37]="During the period January to December 2022: 199 ovine samples and 18 caprine samples were submitted for Toxoplasma serology. There were positive titres in 84 of the ovine samples and 4 of the caprine samples. Toxoplasma fetopathy figures for sheep and goats are provided in Table 1."
excerptArr[38]="Quarter 2 is traditionally the busiest time for such investigations and is related to the frequency of open farm visits undertaken by families or school groups around the Easter holiday and Bank Holidays. Contact with young lambs either through bottle-feeding or handling is the major risk factor for the zoonotic spread of Cryptosporidium parvum in these settings. The availability of appropriate hand-washing facilities including soap, rather than antimicrobial gel (which is not effective for this pathogen) is extremely important."
excerptArr[39]="During 2022 APHA assisted with five STEC outbreaks, including the joint Cryptosporidiosis - STEC O26 outbreak above. There were two other STEC outbreaks linked to dairy farms in England in Q3; STEC O103 and STEC O145. APHA attended several Outbreak Control Team meetings and assisted with the collection of cattle faeces samples for both of these cases. Further information about these cases is available within the Q3 Zoonoses and Veterinary Public Health report."
excerptArr[40]="During 2022 APHA were involved with assisting the UKHSA Incident Management Teams with four toxigenic Corynebacterium ulcerans incidents in Quarter 1, two incidents in Quarter 2, and six incidents in Quarter 3. In Q4 there were six ongoing incidents from Q3, one ongoing incident from Q2 and seven new incidents. These investigations are multidisciplinary and APHA works closely with public health colleagues to investigate, manage, and provide advice regarding the animals involved. Typically APHA will also liaise closely with the private veterinary surgeon to facilitate surveillance swabs, treatment and post treatment clearance swabs as appropriate. Further information about these cases is available within the relevant Zoonoses and Veterinary Public Health reports for each quarter, and in this annual report."
excerptArr[41]="In Q3 there was also a report of a British bulk milk sample which had tested positive for Coxiella burnetii by PCR in an overseas laboratory. Follow up of this case revealed no zoonoses concerns."
excerptArr[42]="In 2022 there were two reports of Avian Chlamydiosis in Psittaciformes. The first case which involved an Amazon parrot was described in the Q2 Zoonoses and Veterinary Public Health report. The second case occurred in Q4 2022 and involved an Amazon parrot housed as part of a parrot collection in a hospitality facility. The bird died after displaying intermittent malaise, although eating and drinking patterns were unaffected. Post-mortem examination of the dead parrot was performed by a private veterinary pathologist and a cloacal swab was collected and sent to a private diagnostic laboratory for Chlamydia PCR testing. This result was positive and was reported to APHA. PCR testing of pooled faeces collected from the group pen also returned a positive result for Chlamydia sp. Further investigations found that the private vet treating the parrots had employed standard quarantine procedures to the group. These included preventing contact between the birds and the public, and limiting exposure to staff except to clean, feed and medicate the group. Chlamydia psittaci, the causative agent of avian chlamydiosis can cause serious human illness. APHA provided further advice on ongoing management of the birds including current cleansing and disinfecting recommendations, to prevent zoonotic disease spread. Public Health colleagues were informed of this case for awareness."
excerptArr[43]="Between 2020 and 2022 there have been 100 epidemiologically distinct B. canis incidents reported to the APHA Brucella Reference Laboratory in total (9 in 2020, 36 in 2021, 55 in 2022). There were 262 dogs tested as part of these investigations and 143 of these dogs tested positive. Please note that many of these cases have been determined on the basis of serology and epidemiology rather than definitively confirmed as infected by bacterial culture."
excerptArr[44]="Please note that only Campylobacter fetopathy numbers are detailed in Table 1 above. It is worthy of note that not all Campylobacter spp isolations from cases of abortion, eg, C. hyointestinalis, C. coli, are of clinical/diagnostic significance and therefore may not be VIDA coded as the cause of the abortion but may be recorded as incidental findings."
excerptArr[45]="Between January and December 2021, a total of 313 porcine and bovine specimens (292 kidney samples and 21 vaginal swabs) were examined by real-time PCR for pathogenic leptospires. Leptospires were detected in three samples; one pig kidney and two bovine kidneys. Forty-nine of the samples submitted were unsuitable for testing. In addition there were two alpaca kidney samples, one dog  kidney, one rabbit kidney, one aborted ovine foetus kidney and five fox kidneys tested, all with negative results."
excerptArr[46]="Mycobacterium microti was isolated on four occasions from samples from a pig, an alpaca and two cats."
excerptArr[47]="There were 51 samples of either placental tissue or foetal fluid submitted from abortion cases in cattle, sheep and goats throughout the year, 13 of which tested positive by PCR for the presence of Coxiella burnetii. As detailed above, positive PCR test submissions cannot be confirmed as the cause of the abortion without further testing."
excerptArr[48]="Streptococcus suis type 2 again predominated, as in previous years, but there is a notable spread across serotypes."
excerptArr[49]="During 2021, a total of 82 sera were received from 27 separate sheep and 6 separate goat submissions of which 29 (35.3%) tested positive for T. gondii. This is compared to 136 serum submissions in 2020 of which 65 (47.8%) were positive."
excerptArr[50]="APHA contributed to the outbreak investigations in October 2021 following the identification of Cryptosporidium parvum amongst students on a college campus. All students affected attended the college farm as part of their courses and had animal contact which included calf handling."
excerptArr[51]="There was only one STEC outbreak investigation carried out during 2021 which has previously been described in the FZ 2100 Q3, (Jul to Sep) Report."
excerptArr[52]="In the second case, an elderly human index case was admitted to hospital with toxigenic Corynebacterium ulcerans infection initially in leg ulcers but also confirmed as a throat infection with severe diphtheresis. The sole in-contact animal was an elderly cat which was a close companion of the human case. Throat swabbing of the cat, with swabs again submitted to APHA Starcross, confirmed the presence of C. ulcerans and the isolate was forwarded to UKHSA Colindale laboratory for confirmatory toxigenic testing which gave a positive result."
excerptArr[53]="England & Wales: There were 66 isolates from ovine abortions were obtained in 2020. The majority of these abortions were due to C. fetus fetus (48 isolates), 14 were C. jejuni and four were C. coli."
excerptArr[54]="Between January and December 2020, a total of 289 specimens from 126 separate submissions (kidneys from 217 pigs, 59 cattle, 4 sheep, 3 common seals, an alpaca, a red panda, a fox and a badger; livers from two pigs) were examined by real-time PCR for pathogenic leptospires. Leptospires were detected in six samples all from separate submissions; 3 pig kidneys and a pig liver, plus a kidney from a badger and a red panda. Thirty-three of the samples submitted were unsuitable for testing."
excerptArr[55]="Mycobacterium avium was isolated on four occasions in 2020 from pigs. Additionally, Mycobacterium avium complex was isolated on seven occasions, from four pigs, a deer, a llama and a cat."
excerptArr[56]="There were three caprine submissions which tested positive for C. burnetii by PCR, from two separate holdings. Only one of the caprine submissions was subsequently confirmed with Q fever as the cause of the abortion."
excerptArr[57]="Streptococcus suis isolates from diagnostic material submitted to APHA and SRUC Veterinary Investigation Centres are typed further for disease surveillance purposes. The numbers and serotypes from porcine diagnostic material submitted during the period January to December 2020 are shown below, with data for previous years for comparison."
excerptArr[58]="During 2020, a total of 136 sera were received from 27 separate sheep, 5 separate goat submissions and one pig submission of which 65 (47.8%) tested positive for T. gondii, comprising of 65 sheep from 20 submissions. This is compared to 166 serum submissions in 2019."
excerptArr[59]="Investigations to assist in human outbreaks of Cryptosporidiosis linked to direct contact with animals are undertaken at the request of Consultants in Communicable Disease Control (CsCDC) of PHE/PHW (CsPHM in Scotland) and in collaboration with the National Cryptosporidium Reference Unit, Swansea, and follow jointly agreed guidelines."
excerptArr[60]="No new investigations into STEC outbreaks were conducted during 2020."
excerptArr[61]="In 2020 APHA were involved in much fewer zoonotic investigations of cases of toxigenic Corynebacterium ulcerans infections. There was just one with a human index case with companion animal contact and two cases with the animal being the index case."
excerptArr[62]="In total, in 2020, approximately 80 dogs were serologically tested for B. canis due to their association with these incidents. Of these, approximately 50 were seropositive and, because of the additional epidemiological evidence, considered to be infected. Many of those initially testing as negative have been tested on more than one occasion in order to try to confirm infection status after elapse of a given period of time following potential exposure. Although legislation does not facilitate dog tracing, all imported batches of dogs associated with an initial positive were successfully traced for most incidents as the new owners had kept in touch with owners of litter mates via social media."
excerptArr[63]="In early 2020 APHA was involved in an investigation of a bovine cysticercosis outbreak linked to an indoor beef finisher farm in the North of England. A farm visit investigation was carried out following the report by a slaughterhouse, in Northern England, of a significant level of Cysticercus bovis infection in fattened cattle submitted for slaughter from a single farm. Advice was given to the farmer and private veterinary surgeon to help prevent further cases and future outbreaks."
excerptArr[64]="There was a dramatic reduction in the number of cases of fasciolosis diagnosed in 2019 compared to previous years. The reduction in fasciolosis could be linked to the very dry summer in 2018, affecting the lifecycle of the trematode parasite, Fasciola hepatica."
excerptArr[65]="England and Wales: Twelve isolations from bovine abortions and 133 isolates from ovine abortions were obtained in 2019. The majority of these abortions were due to C. fetus fetus. Scotland: In 2019 there were three isolations from bovine abortions, two of which were C. fetus fetus and one was C. jejuni. Campylobacter fetus fetus was isolated from one cattle sheath wash submission. Additionally, there were 17 isolations from ovine abortions, all were C. fetus fetus apart from one which was Campylobacter spp."
excerptArr[66]="Between January and December 2019, a total of 287 specimens (all kidney samples apart from one spleen and three urine samples, primarily from pigs, but including 80 cattle, a fox, a deer and a goat) were examined by real-time PCR for pathogenic leptospires. Four samples from two separate submissions, all pig kidney samples, tested positive for Leptospira DNA. Thirty-one samples were unsuitable for testing and 252 samples tested negative."
excerptArr[67]="Mycobacterium microti was isolated on eight occasions in 2019; from six cats, one alpaca and a pig. Mycobacterium avium was isolated on six occasions from pigs and from a deer. Mycobacterium vaccae was isolated from two alpacas. Mycobacterium caprae was isolated from a deer, M. phlei from a pig and M. terrae from an alpaca."
excerptArr[68]="Coxiella burnetii was confirmed by PCR testing once in 2019. However, this finding does not conclusively confirm Q fever as the cause of the abortion as another attributable cause of abortion was also identified."
excerptArr[69]="Streptococcus suis type 2 again predominated, as in previous years, but there is a notable spread across serotypes."
excerptArr[70]="During 2019, a total of 166 sera were received from 33 separate sheep, 5 separate goat submissions, three dog submissions and one horse submission of which 78 (46.9%) tested positive for T. gondii, comprising of 74 sheep from 27 submissions, two goats from two submissions and four dogs from three separate submissions. This is compared to 154 serum submissions in 2018."
excerptArr[71]="During Quarter 4, APHA were involved in a cryptosporidiosis outbreak involving veterinary students. Cryptosporidium parvum subtype llaA15G2R1 was confirmed in four veterinary students. Further students were suspected to also have had cryptosporidiosis as they reported clinical signs which included fever, headache, nausea, diarrhoea and stomach cramps, following undertaking their farm animal clinical rotations at the same location."
excerptArr[72]="APHA attended the Outbreak Control Team meeting and a visit to the open farm was conducted by a Veterinary Investigation Officer team. Twenty-six faecal samples were collected from a wide range of species, both at pasture and housed, with no E. coli STEC O157 isolated from any of the samples."
excerptArr[73]="For the human index cases, contact animals are swabbed by the case’s private veterinary surgeon (PVS) and swabs are sent to APHA Starcross for initial culturing. Any C. ulcerans isolates are forwarded to PHE Colindale for toxin testing. The cost of swabbing animal contact cases by the PVS and any subsequent antimicrobial treatment of positive animals, must be borne by the animal’s owner. The initial culturing of these swabs at APHA Starcross is then funded by Project FZ2100."
excerptArr[74]="England & Wales: Seven isolations from bovine abortions and 94 isolates from ovine abortions were obtained in 2018.  The majority of these abortions were due to C. fetus fetus. Scotland: Ten isolations from bovine abortions and 26 isolations from ovine abortions were made in 2018. The majority of these abortions were due to C. fetus fetus."
excerptArr[75]="Between January and December 2018, a total of 243 specimens (kidney samples, primarily from pigs, but including 45 cattle, two dogs and one fox) were examined by real-time PCR for pathogenic leptospires. Five samples from two separate submissions, all pig samples, tested positive for Leptospira DNA. Thirty-four samples were unsuitable for testing and 204 samples tested negative."
excerptArr[76]="M. microti was isolated from two alpacas. M. avium was isolated on six occasions from pigs."
excerptArr[77]="C. burnetii was confirmed by PCR testing and considered the cause of fetopathy on four occasions; three in cattle and one in sheep."
excerptArr[78]="Streptococcus suis type 2 again predominated as in previous years, but there is a notable spread across serotypes."
excerptArr[79]="During 2018, a total of 154 sera were received from 32 separate sheep,3 separate goat submissions and one camelid submission of which 73 (47.4%) tested positive for T. gondii, comprising of 67 sheep from 25 submissions, 5 goats from 2 submissions and one alpaca. This is compared to 387 serum submissions in 2017, a 60% fall, from 88 sheep and 15 goat premises. However, the overall positive ratio was incredibly close at 47.4% compared to 49.4% positive samples in 2017. The dramatic fall in submission numbers most likely reflects the fact that pharmaceutical companies are able to offer free serological screening of flocks."
excerptArr[80]="APHA was fully involved in a case between 19 March and 24 April 2018 with 118 confirmed and 80 probable human cases of Cryptosporidium parvum. The cases all had a known link to a working farm in West Sussex, open annually to the public during the lambing season."
excerptArr[81]="Verocytotoxigenic-producing E. coli (VTEC, STEC) O157 outbreak investigations are undertaken, according to agreed guidelines, at the request of CsCDC of PHE/PHW (CsPHM in Scotland) where an animal-associated source is suspected. These investigations variously involve collaboration with other organisations, including the Environmental Health Departments of Local Authorities and the Health and Safety Executive. Determination of phage type (PT), verocytotoxin (VT) type, and comparison of human and animal isolates by variable number of tandem repeat (VNTR) analysis are performed by the Gastrointestinal Bacteria Reference Unit (GBRU), PHE Colindale. If isolates from animals circumstantially implicated in outbreaks have the same PT and indistinguishable VNTR profiles from human cases, this is taken as confirmatory evidence of a causal association. In practice, there can be minor VNTR profile variation at a single tandem repeat locus amongst some isolates associated with an outbreak investigation. Other VTEC (STEC) O157 PTs may be detected incidentally during the investigation of animal premises."
excerptArr[82]="In January, toxigenic C. ulcerans was detected from a patient’s throat swab and APHA were approached due to the possible zoonotic risk from the case’s six cats. APHA arranged throat swabbing of the six cats by the case’s local veterinary surgeon. The swabs were returned to APHA Starcross for culture, with no evidence of C. ulcerans in any of the swabs."
excerptArr[83]="An advisory visit was carried out to a wildlife rescue centre following an outbreak of respiratory disease in staff. A tentative diagnosis made by Public Health England (PHE) colleagues was Psittacosis, based on risk analysis, serological results and response to treatment. Both PHE and Environmental Health visited the site and raised concerns regarding the zoonotic disease control measures in place. APHA input was requested and a visit was carried out. During the visit a number of issues were identified and highlighted. These ranged from the effective use and storage of PPE (Personal Protective Equipment); to the education of staff regarding zoonotic diseases and the need for robust and structured pathogen control programmes. It was evident that improvements could be made and the input of APHA in providing an objective viewpoint was appreciated."
excerptArr[84]="Abortions and increased returns to service on an indoor breeding unit prompted submission of a litter of mummified fetuses for investigation. Mainly older sows were affected and those aborting did not show other clinical signs. PCR detected the presence of pathogenic Leptospira DNA in fetal kidney tissue, confirming a diagnosis of leptospirosis. To identify the specific serovar involved, serological testing by microscopic agglutination test against the panel of pathogenic Leptospira serovars was strongly recommended. Leptospirosis due to various serovars in pigs can cause late abortion, stillbirth, birth of piglets with low viability and/or infertility."
excerptArr[85]="An adult female with pre-existing health conditions was diagnosed with psittacosis after being admitted to hospital with worsening respiratory disease signs."
excerptArr[86]="Brucella canis was isolated from blood samples from dogs on two separate occasions in 2017. Both dogs had been imported from Eastern Europe (one from Romania and one from Bosnia) and were presented to their PVS with discospondylitis."
excerptArr[87]="England & Wales: Nine isolations from bovine abortions and 121 isolates from sheep abortions were obtained in 2017.  The majority of these abortions were due to C. fetus fetus. Scotland: Eight isolations from bovine abortions and 21 isolations from sheep abortions were made in 2017. The majority of these abortions were due to C. fetus fetus."
excerptArr[88]="Between January and December 2017, a total of 189 specimens (kidneys and urine samples, primarily from pigs, but also from cattle and sheep and one dog) were examined by real-time PCR for pathogenic leptospires. Eight samples from four submissions (all pig samples) tested positive for Leptospira DNA. Thirty-two samples were unsuitable for testing and 149 samples tested negative."
excerptArr[89]="M. microti was isolated from two cats and three alpacas. M. avium was isolated from one cat."
excerptArr[90]="C. burnetii was confirmed by PCR on 12 occasions (seven from England and Wales and five from Scotland), but was considered the cause of foetopathy on only four occasions."
excerptArr[91]="Streptococcus suis type 2 again predominated as in previous years, but there is a notable spread across serotypes."
excerptArr[92]="During 2017, a total of 387 sera were received from 88 separate sheep and 15 separate goat submissions of which 191 (49.4%) tested positive for T. gondii, comprising of 170 sheep and 21 goats. Three separate fox serum samples also tested positive, with the single horse sample giving a negative result."
excerptArr[93]="APHA was contacted by Public Health England following an outbreak of human cryptosporidiosis possibly linked to contact with animals at an open farm, with epidemiology indicating that the outbreak related to the feeding of three orphan lambs."
excerptArr[94]="APHA visited the farm and collected samples from the cattle, giving advice to the farmer with regards general hygiene and biosecurity and epidemiological aspects of the infection. E. coli O157:H7 were also isolated from several faecal samples collected from cows and calves."
excerptArr[95]="England and Wales: In addition to the Campylobacter fetopathy diagnoses detailed above, thermophilic Campylobacter coli and Campylobacter jejuni were isolated on seven (five sheep, one cattle, one goat) and 25 (17 sheep, six cattle, one avian and one goat) occasions respectively. Scotland: SACCVS identified a range of Campylobacter spp, in addition to those involved in fetopathy, from a variety of domestic animals during 2016"
excerptArr[96]="During 2016 a total of 189 clinical specimens were submitted for examination by real-time PCR for the presence of pathogenic leptospires. The specimens were from a range of mammalian species but mainly cattle and pig fetal kidneys. Of the 166 samples suitable for testing, leptospiral DNA was detected in one bovine foetus (see below) and one pig submission (see1.2 above), all other samples tested negative. There is no field evidence to suggest that leptospirosis is a significant clinical animal health problem in England or Wales, although this will be in part because of the level of cattle vaccination currently undertaken."
excerptArr[97]="M. microti was isolated from six cats and one alpaca. M. avium was isolated from two alpacas."
excerptArr[98]="There were 12 incidents of Q fever diagnosed in 2016, three in goats, four in sheep, and five in cattle, on farms in England, Wales and Scotland."
excerptArr[99]="Streptococcus suis type 2 again predominated."
excerptArr[100]="During 2016, 217 (50%) of 435 sheep sera received (from 82 separate submissions) tested positive for T. gondii.. In goats, 10 of 78 sera (17 separate submissions) tested positive. None of the 33 pig sera from two separate submissions tested positive. Two separate fox samples were also tested, one of which was positive."
excerptArr[101]="In addition, an APHA investigation was requested in April to assist the Outbreak Control Team with a protracted outbreak of Cryptosporidium parvum infection, affecting nine people who visited an open farm in the North of England between February and April. Cryptosporidium oocysts were detected in faecal samples from lambs and one lamb had the same subtype as the human cases, confirming the farm animals as the likely source of the Cryptosporidium infection in the visitors. Advice was given on bottle feeding protocols and on reducing environmental contamination. This outbreak was consistent with a trickle of infection, rather than a single point outbreak solely attributed to poor farm risk control measures."
excerptArr[102]="APHA assistance was sought in the investigation of an outbreak of 32 cases of VTEC O157 PT34 in a care home in the South of England with onset dates extending back to 12th June 2016. Both residents and staff were affected with some residents hospitalised. The outbreak strain was the same as that of a national outbreak of VTEC epidemiologically linked to bagged salad leaves. The Outbreak Control Team wished to investigate the possibility of two dogs acting as vectors in the outbreak, one a resident in the home and the other a visiting therapy dog. Freshly voided faeces from the two dogs were collected by Environmental Health Officers for culture but O157 was not isolated from either dog."
excerptArr[103]="Public Health England requested assistance of APHA in the investigation of a potential companion animal (a dog) reservoir of infection of C. ulcerans. The owner of the animal had been hospitalized with symptoms of diphtheria and a toxigenic strain of C. ulcerans had been identified. The dog was clinically well. Toxigenic C. ulcerans was isolated from a pharyngeal swab from the dog, thereby confirming the dog as a shared reservoir of infection, although how the animal acquired infection was not known."
excerptArr[104]="An investigation was undertaken into an outbreak of yersiniosis in a large commercial dairy goat herd in England. Clinical signs of depression, inappetance, enteritis and significant milk drop were reported in the herd of 100 milking goats, and three weeks into the outbreak a morbidity of almost 100% had been reported. Some animals subsequently developed conjunctivitis with associated lymph node enlargement and Yersinia pseudotuberculosis cultured from conjunctival swabs. Antibiotic therapy brought the outbreak under control over a seven week period. The epidemiology and significant morbidity suggested a feed mediated source of infection and large numbers of starlings had been seen to feed on the silage fed to the goats. Wildlife are known carriers of Yersinia spp. and advice to exclude wildlife such as rodents and birds from the feed was given."
excerptArr[105]="Sheep and goat abortions: In view of the large number of potentially zoonotic infections involved in abortions in these species, additional information (mainly from the first quarter of 2015) is shown separately below. General advice to pregnant women during the lambing season is available on the gov.uk website (please click on links): Pregnant women are advised to avoid animals that are giving birth and Infection risks during lambing season, from the Welsh Government Pregnant women advised to avoid animals that are giving birth and also from the Scottish government: Lambing advice to pregnant women"
excerptArr[106]="England & Wales: A total of 184 campylobacter isolates (mainly from ruminant abortion cases or from fertility screening submissions in England and Wales) were identified by the APHA -Starcross laboratory during 2015: there were 140 isolates from sheep, 41 from cattle and two from birds. Scotland: A total of 64 campylobacter isolates were identified from livestock by SACCVS during 2015 (17 bovine, 46 ovine and one caprine isolate), again mainly from ruminant abortion of fertility screening submissions."
excerptArr[107]="During 2015, a total of 216 clinical specimens were submitted for examination by real-time PCR for the presence of pathogenic leptospires. The specimens were from a range of mammalian species but mainly cattle and pig fetal kidneys. Of the 188 samples suitable for testing, leptospiral DNA was detected in one bovine foetus, all other samples tested negative. There is no field evidence to suggest that leptospirosis is a significant clinical animal health problem in England or Wales, although this will be in part because of the level of cattle vaccination currently undertaken."
excerptArr[108]="M. microti was isolated from three cats. Other isolates from cats were one of M. malmoense and one of M. kumamotonense. M. avium was isolated from one pig."
excerptArr[109]="There were eight incidents of Q fever diagnosed in 2015, four in goats, one in sheep, and three in cattle, and all in farms in England or Wales. There were no incidents of Q fever diagnosed in Scotland."
excerptArr[110]="Streptococcus suis type 2 again predominated."
excerptArr[111]="During 2015, 373 (46.9%) of 795 sheep sera received (from 136 separate submissions) tested positive for T. gondii. This compares to 421 (73.7%) positive sera from 571 samples (114 submissions) received in 2014. In goats, 81 (60.4%) of 134 sera (16 separate submissions) tested positive. None of 102 pig sera from four separate submissions tested positive. One out of three sera from alpaca from three separate premises tested positive for T. gondii."
excerptArr[112]="In April, APHA assistance was requested in the investigation of a protracted outbreak of Cryptosporidium parvum infection (two different subtypes), affecting six people who visited an open farm in South East England between February and April. Assessments by the Environmental Health Officer (EHO) and Consultant in Communicable Disease Control (CCDC) had suggested the farm was in full compliance with the guidelines outlined in the Industry Code of Practice, an opinion which was confirmed by the visiting Veterinary Investigation Officer. Low numbers of Cryptosporidium oocysts were detected in faecal samples from lambs and goat kids and veterinary advice was given on how environmental contamination could be reduced further. This outbreak was consistent with a trickle of infection due to human factors, rather than a single point outbreak attributed to poor farm risk control measures."
excerptArr[113]="There were three VTEC O157 outbreak investigations in 2015."
excerptArr[114]="APHA assistance was requested in the investigation of three cases of hantavirus infection in people in South Wales in 2015. All cases were epidemiologically linked by the transfer, breeding and husbandry of domestic (fancy) and/or feeder rats (bred for food for reptiles). The first case (Case 1) became unwell with acute hantavirus infection requiring hospitalisation in July. Case 1 owned a small number of fancy rats as pets, and also kept approximately 300 hundred feeder rats which he bred as feed for snakes and for sale. In September, a family member (Case 2) of the first case who had looked after the rats whilst the Case 1 was unwell, became unwell and was diagnosed with hantavirus infection. Around the same time, a third case (Case 3) was identified. Case 3 had a small number of pet rats, and also worked at a large commercial rat breeder which produced reptile feed. Case 3 had indirect links with Case 1 via a rat sold online. Screening of suppliers and customers of Case 1 has identified a number of people with serological evidence of hantavirus infection, some with previously undiagnosed illness."
excerptArr[115]="APHA continued to support public health authorities in the investigation of an outbreak of VTEC O55 infection in people in Dorset which has been ongoing since July 2014. This is a new strain of VTEC, and an outbreak had never been recorded in the UK before. The outbreak was characterised by its geographical restriction to the county and the severity of clinical disease, with increased risk of haemolytic uraemic syndrome. At the time of writing there have been 30 cases of VTEC O55, with similar whole genome sequencing patterns, linked to Dorset. APHA has assisted the outbreak control team through undertaking veterinary risk assessment (including animal sampling) of three open farms visited by the cases within their incubation period, through provision of advice on bird migratory pathways and through provision of livestock density mapping in relation to flood plains.  Veterinary advice on companion animal testing has also been provided and, to date, two cat samples have tested positive for VTEC O55. Despite extensive investigation of food, environmental and animal reservoirs, no source for the outbreak has yet been identified, and investigations continue."
excerptArr[116]="Public Health England requested APHA assistance in the investigation of two separate cases of Corynebacterium ulcerans infection in people in the latter part of 2015, where epidemiological investigations had identified pet dogs as potential reservoirs of infection."
excerptArr[117]="Further to the report of an outbreak of Cysticercus bovis mentioned in previous FZ2100 reports (Q3 and Q4 reports, 2013), APHA investigated a further four farms in the same locality as the farm of the original outbreak. C. bovis is the intermediate (larval) stage of Taenia saginata, the human beef tapeworm. Cattle become infected with bovine cysticercosis by ingesting materials contaminated with tapeworm eggs originating from human faeces. Humans, the definitive host, become infected via consumption of raw or undercooked beef. Bovine cysticercosis is of economic importance to the beef industry due to the costs of control measures (carcases condemnations, downgrading and extended cold storage) for carcases identified as being affected during meat inspection at abattoir."
excerptArr[118]="The carcase of a pet rat which had been euthanased due to age-related health issues was submitted to APHA to test for hantavirus. The pet rat was one of a group of three belonging to a household in which two human cases of clinical hantavirus infection had been identified. Molecular testing at APHA Weybridge identified the presence of Seoul virus RNA in lung and kidney using a specific real time PCR. Epidemiological links between this pet rat and several other pet rat colonies were identified, including the Oxfordshire colony previously reported in which a significant level of infection with hantavirus was demonstrated (See Q1 and Q4 (2013) FZ2100 report). Partial polymerase gene sequences from this recently tested domestic rat are identical to those detected in the previously reported colony. Mixing of rodents is likely to facilitate spread of hantavirus and other infections between colonies, emphasizing that principles of biosecurity are equally applicable to the pet sector."
excerptArr[119]="Sheep and goat abortions: In view of the large number of potentially zoonotic infections involved in abortions in these species, additional information (mainly from the first quarter of 2014) is shown separately below. General advice to pregnant women during the lambing season is available on the gov.uk website (please click on links): Pregnant women advised to avoid animals that are giving birth and Infection risks during lambing season, from the Welsh Government Pregnant women are advised to avoid animals that are giving birth and also from the Scottish government: Lambing advice to pregnant women"
excerptArr[120]="A total of 236 campylobacter isolates (mainly from ruminant abortion cases or from fertility screening submissions in England and Wales) were identified by the APHA -Starcross laboratory during 2014: there were 181 isolates from sheep, 52 from cattle, two from birds and one isolate from an antelope."
excerptArr[121]="The prevalence and variation of Hepatitis E (HEV) virus in UK pigs at slaughter was assessed through alignment of APHA data for prevalence of HEV RNA in caecal-content samples (compiled as part of the 2013 Baseline survey in pigs1 and Defra-funded project OZ0155) with PHE data for prevalence of HEV RNA and antibody in blood of the same pigs (sampled at time of slaughter; n=629). HEV RNA was detected in at least one sample type in 20.5% of pigs (17% of caecal-contents and 5.7% of blood samples). The prevalence of antibodies to HEV was 92.8% (584/629)."
excerptArr[122]="During 2014, a total of 147 clinical specimens were examined by real-time PCR for the presence of pathogenic leptospires. The specimens were from a range of mammalian species but mainly cattle and pig fetal kidneys. Of the 126 samples suitable for testing, none tested positive for leptospiral DNA, a similar finding to 2013. There is no field evidence to suggest that leptospirosis is a significant clinical animal health problem in England or Wales, although this will be in part because of the level of cattle vaccination currently undertaken."
excerptArr[123]="M. microti was isolated from five cats. M. avium was isolated from three pigs and also from one wallaby which belonged to a zoological collection."
excerptArr[124]="During 2014, 421 (73.7%) of 571 sheep sera received (from 114 separate submissions) tested positive for T. gondii. This compares to 528 (65.3%) positive sera from 808 samples (216 submissions) received in 2013. In goats, 57 (70.4%) of 81 sera (15 separate submissions) tested positive. Two cattle sera from two separate submissions both tested negative, as did a single pig serum sample. Two tayra (weasel-like mammals) sera (from a zoological collection) both tested negative."
excerptArr[125]="There were four diagnoses of Q fever in 2014, two of these were on cattle farms and two were part of a protracted incident on a single goat farm, and all cases were identified in England. Of the bovine diagnoses, the first involved a four year old Devon suckler cow which had aborted in late gestation. Q fever was also diagnosed as the cause of abortion in an adult dairy cow, which was the second to abort in the space of a week in a herd of 160 cows. The other two diagnoses followed examination of foetal material from a dairy goat farm which had experience a protracted abortion storm mainly in maiden doe goats. In all four cases, Coxiella burnetii was the sole abortifacient detected during the investigation."
excerptArr[126]="Streptococcus suis type 2 again predominated."
excerptArr[127]="In March, APHA assistance was requested in the investigation of five cases of Cryptosporidium infection in visitors to an open farm in the North West of England. APHA provided advice to the Outbreak Control Team, but no veterinary visit was required on this occasion."
excerptArr[128]="In March, APHA assistance was requested in the investigation of three cases (within two families) of VTEC O157 PT 21/28 infection in children who had visited an open farm in the East of England. Environmental Health Officers had recommended several measures to further reduce the risk of zoonotic infection in visitors. An APHA Veterinary Investigation Officer visited the farm and reported good standards of hygiene and husbandry and the farm was considered to be in broad compliance with the industry Code of Practice. VTEC O157 was not isolated from any of the 42 samples taken from animals on the farm and it was suggested that evaluation of other possible exposures may be warranted."
excerptArr[129]="In December, APHA assistance was requested in the investigation of an outbreak of VTEC O55 infection in people in Dorset. Human cases of VTEC O55 infection are very rare, and an outbreak had never been recorded in the UK before. The outbreak was characterised by its geographical restriction to the county and the severity of clinical disease. At least 18 cases have been confirmed since July 2014, with a high proportion of the clinical cases developing haemolytic uraemic syndrome (HUS). Due to the severity of the disease, a very thorough investigation of many possible exposures was undertaken by the outbreak control team. APHA assisted in the investigation of an open farm which had been visited by (only) two cases prior to the onset of illness, VTEC O55 was not identified in any of the animal samples collected during the visit, but advice was offered on the control of zoonoses in general on the premises. As VTEC O55 is closely related to VTEC O157, for which a major reservoir of infection is cattle, APHA also assisted with mapping of cattle imports from areas of Europe where VTEC O55 cases had previously been reported, to investigate any possible route of introduction of VTEC O55 to Dorset. Despite extensive investigation of food, environmental and animal reservoirs, no source for the outbreak has yet been identified, and investigations continue."
excerptArr[130]="In October, the assistance of APHA was requested in determining a potential companion animal source of infection of toxigenic C. ulcerans, which was isolated from a non-healing wound of a human patient following a joint replacement surgery. Toxigenic C. ulcerans was isolated from pharyngeal swabs taken from the pet dog in the household, confirming a shared reservoir of infection. APHA offered advice on reducing the risk of zoonotic infections from companion animals, and liaised with the owner’s private veterinary surgeon regarding treatment to clear the bacteria. A post antibiotic clearance swab of the dog indicated that treatment had been successful."
excerptArr[131]="Pet rats (Rattus norvegicus) were identified as the possible source of Seoul hantavirus infection in male human patient from Wales, who had presented with hemorrhagic and pulmonary syndrome. Hantavirus RNA was detected in blood and tissue samples from the patient’s two pet rats, and further investigations of the fancy rat breeding colony from which the rats were derived and subsequently returned, identified a hantavirus RNA in a significant number of the 21 rats tested using RT-PCR."
excerptArr[132]="The investigation of rapid onset weakness, dehydration and death in three eight-month-old alpacas on one premises identified cryptosporidiosis as the likely diagnosis. Post-mortem examination revealed ulcerative enterotyphlocolitis and histopathology demonstrated a heavy cryptosporidial burden within the small intestine. PCR testing identified the cryptosporidia as Cryptosporidium parvum. This is an unusual diagnosis in eight-month-old alpacas as previous clinical cases have mostly been in young, pre-weaned crias. The zoonotic potential of this infection was raised with the private veterinary surgeon and the owner of the alpacas. A summary of this incident was published in the Veterinary Record (Wessels and others, 2013; see section 4)"
excerptArr[133]="Between February and April 2013, thirteen cases of nervous disease were reported in ewes, with clinical signs consisting variously of circling, unilateral paralysis, drooling or recumbency. Post-mortem examination of one ewe in April confirmed histopathological lesions typical of listerial encephalitis, although Listeria was not isolated from either the brain or the milk of this ewe. Listeria spp. were detected from bulk milk collected by the farmer on several sampling occasions in April and also in subsequent months, but Listeria was not isolated from pooled samples from individual ewes. Following the initial detection of Listeria spp., milk ceased to be sold for the manufacture of unpasteurized cheese."
excerptArr[134]="Reports of significant levels of Cysticersus bovis infection in fattened cattle submitted for slaughter by a single beef producer prompted an investigation into potential sources of the parasite. C. bovis is the intermediate (larval) stage of Taenia saginata, the human beef tapeworm. Cattle become infected with bovine cysticercosis by ingesting materials contaminated with tapeworm eggs originating from human faeces. Humans, the definitive host, become infected via consumption of raw or undercooked beef. Bovine cysticercosis is of economic importance to the beef industry due to the costs of meat inspection and control measures (carcases condemnations, downgrading and cold storage of infected carcases)."
excerptArr[135]="The carcase of a pet Yellow Crowned Amazon parrot which had died following a short duration illness was accepted to screen for avian chlamydiosis.  A member of the household where the bird was kept had recently been diagnosed with pneumonia of unknown aetiology."
excerptArr[136]="Sheep and goat abortions: In view of the large number of potentially zoonotic infections involved in abortions in these species, additional information (mainly from the first quarter of 2013) is shown separately below. General advice to pregnant women during the lambing season is available on the Defra and Public Health England (PHE) websites"
excerptArr[137]="A total of 258 campylobacter isolates (mainly from ruminant abortion cases) were identified by the AHVLA - Starcross laboratory during 2013: there were 242 isolates from ovines, 14 bovine, one avian and one isolate from a giraffe. Of the ovine isolates, 205 (85%) were C. fetus fetus, a similar proportion to that seen in 2012, with the remaining 37 (15%) a mixture of enteric strains (15% also in 2012). Of the 14 bovine isolates, seven (50%) were C. fetus venerealis intermedius compared to 31% in 2012, one (7%) was C. fetus fetus (17% in 2012) and one was C. fetus venerealis (none in 2012). The remaining five (35%) of bovine isolates compared to 51% in 2011) were a mixture of enteric (thermophilic) strains."
excerptArr[138]="Funding was received from the Strategic Evidence Partnership Fund 13/14 (Defra) to investigate hepatitis E virus circulating in UK pigs (project OZ0155; July 2013 - March 2014).  Caecal content samples that had been collected and archived as part of the 2013 baseline survey in pigs*, were tested for HEV with detection of HEV RNA in 17% of samples tested (109 positive samples out of 637 tested).  This data is now being aligned with results obtained by Public Health England (PHE) investigating the occurrence of HEV in the blood of the same pigs.  The virus that is currently circulating in UK pigs is now being characterised via sequencing of the full genome or partial genome from select study samples.  Comparative analysis with available data from human cases of HEV infection will subsequently be undertaken in collaboration with PHE."
excerptArr[139]="During 2013, a total of 243 clinical specimens were examined by real-time PCR for the presence of pathogenic leptospires.  The specimens were from a range of mammalian species but mainly cattle and pig fetal kidneys. Of the 230 samples suitable for testing, none tested positive for leptospiral DNA. This is in contrast to 2012, when 2.6% of samples tested positive. There is no field evidence to suggest that leptospirosis is a significant clinical animal health problem in England or Wales, although this will be in part because of the level of cattle vaccination currently undertaken."
excerptArr[140]="M. microti was isolated from cats (13 cases), alpacas (2) and pigs (2). M. avium was isolated from one dog. M. fortuitum was identified from one cat, and M. malmoense was also identified from one cat."
excerptArr[141]="During 2013, 528 (65.3%) of 808 sheep sera received (from 216 separate submissions) tested positive for T. gondii. This compares to 444 (51.3%) positive sera from 864 samples (213 submissions) received in 2012. In goats, 32 (50.0%) of 64 sera (17 separate submissions) tested positive. None of the 52 pig sera (two separate submissions) tested positive. Five dog sera (two submissions), one alpaca serum and one deer serum all tested negative."
excerptArr[142]="There were three incidents (all in dairy herds) of Q fever abortion in England and Wales confirmed in 2013, there were no confirmed diagnoses in Scotland. Diagnoses were made by routine examination of MZN-stained placental smears followed by confirmatory PCR testing or histopathology. In one incident, where six out of a group of 40 heifers had produced still-born full term calves, Coxiella burnetii was the sole pathogen detected. This herd had a history of importing cattle, including a batch of heifers from the Netherlands. In the other two incidents, co-infection with another abortifacient (Neospora caninum in one case, Bacillus licheniformis in the other) was demonstrated."
excerptArr[143]="Streptococcus suis type 2 again predominated."
excerptArr[144]="In April, AHVLA assistance was requested in the investigation of a large outbreak of Cryptosporidium parvum in visitors to an open farm in Yorkshire. In total, 45 human cases of infection with Cryptosporidium were confirmed. Cryptosporidium oocysts were identified in samples from lambs, ewes, pigs, hens and guinea pigs. Further testing of these isolates confirmed the same subtype as the human cases (C. parvum IIaA19G1R1) to be present in lamb samples, this is consistent with the farm animals being the source of outbreak. A case control study identified a failure to wash hands before eating and lack of provision of information on zoonotic risks as risk factors for this outbreak. Advice was given in accordance with existing guidelines."
excerptArr[145]="In June, two cases of VTEC O157 infection in children who had visited an open farm in the South East of England prompted a request for AHVLA investigation. Although the phage types and VNTR profiles of the two human isolates were dissimilar, the farm had previously been implicated as the source of a large outbreak of VTEC O157. No areas of non-compliance with the industry Code of Practice were identified by the public health investigation team and VTEC O157 was not cultured from any of the 45 animal samples collected during the farm visit. Both human cases had other plausible exposure risk factors and it was concluded that the farm presented no additional public health risk."
excerptArr[146]="Incidents of hantavirus infection in people linked to pet rats (please see section 1.2)"
excerptArr[147]="A cluster of human cases of infection with a Panton-Valentine Leukocidin (PVL) producing strain of meticillin resistant Staphylococcus aureus (PVL-MRSA) and the potential role of companion animals in the epidemiology of the outbreak."
excerptArr[148]="Sheep and goat abortions: In view of the large number of potentially zoonotic infections involved in abortions in these species, additional information (mainly from the first quarter of 2012) is shown separately below. General advice to pregnant women during the lambing season is available on the Defra and HPA websites"
excerptArr[149]="A total of 133 campylobacter isolates (mainly from ruminant abortion cases) were identified by the AHVLA - Winchester laboratory during 2012: there were 93 isolates from ovines, 35 bovine, three avian, one porcine and one isolate from a rhinoceros. Seventy nine (85%) of the ovine isolates were C. fetus fetus, compared to 70% in 2011, with the remaining 14 (15%) a mixture of enteric strains (30% in 2011). Of the 35 bovine isolates, 11 (31%) were C. fetus venerealis intermedius compared to 48% in 2011, six (17%) were C. fetus fetus (8% in 2011) and none were C. fetus venerealis (3% in 2011). The remaining 18 (51% of bovine isolates compared to 40% in 2011) were a mixture of enteric (thermophilic) strains."
excerptArr[150]="The results of the investigation of the presence of HEV in the UK pork food chain (part of the EU project VITAL/OZ0147) have been published (Berto, A., et al, 2012). The data provided evidence of the potential for foodborne transmission of HEV in the pork food chain in the UK.  Results from the other three European laboratories that had also investigated HEV in their respective pork food chains (Czech Republic, Italy and Spain) were also published (Di Bartolo et al. 2012), presenting similar findings to those found in the UK. Further publications describing prevalence and transmission dynamic modelling data for HEV, and also describing the detection of viable virus in a French pork liver sausage using the 3D cell culture assay are listed in the section 4 of this report."
excerptArr[151]="The campaign to raise awareness of hydatid disease will continue across Wales, with a new poster and updated web information.  Using cattle as sentinels, a targeted study indicated that E. granulosus is active in all Welsh regions and many English counties."
excerptArr[152]="During 2012, a total of 345 clinical specimens were examined by real-time PCR for the presence of pathogenic leptospires.  The specimens were from a range of mammalian species but mainly cattle and pig fetal kidneys. Of the 335 samples suitable for testing, four (1.6%) of 237 bovine samples (0.6% in 2011) and five (5.2%) of 97 porcine samples (1.9% in 2011) were positive. The five positive porcine samples came from only two separate submissions."
excerptArr[153]="M. microti was isolated from cats (11) and also one polecat. M. gordonae was isolated from one cat. Unclassified mycobacteria were isolated from one pig, one cat and one dog."
excerptArr[154]="During 2012, 444 (51.3%) of 864 sheep sera received (from 213 separate submissions) tested positive for T. gondii. This compares to 285 (43.5%) positive sera from 655 samples (152 submissions) received in 2011. In goats, seven (15.9%) of 44 sera (14 separate submissions) tested positive. In pigs, one (0.6%) of 154 sera (from five separate submissions) tested positive. A single cat serum sample and a single horse serum sample tested negative."
excerptArr[155]="Additionally in 2012, PCR detected the presence of C. burnetii in placental or uterine material from a further two submissions: (1) from the placenta of a dairy cow which had aborted, but limited further testing sufficient to confirm Q fever as the cause of the abortion was performed, and (2) from the placenta of a sheep from Scotland for which no further information was available. In these cases Q fever was not confirmed to be contributing to a clinical problem (hence a VIDA diagnosis was not applied) although the potential zoonotic hazard was highlighted."
excerptArr[156]="Streptococcus suis type 2 again predominated. The number of identifications of S. suis type 1/2, which was seen to rise in 2011, reverted to expected levels in 2012."
excerptArr[157]="In April, AHVLA assistance was requested in the investigation of 10 human cases of Cryptosporidium parvum infection linked to a community farm in Gwent. Nine of those who were unwell were staff or volunteers at the farm, and one case was a visitor to the farm. Cryptosporidium oocysts were identified in faecal samples from lambs and baby goats and these animals were considered to be the most likely source of human infection. Advice was given in accordance with existing guidelines."
excerptArr[158]="Verocytotoxigenic-producing E.coli (VTEC) O157 outbreak investigations are undertaken according to agreed guidelines at the request of CsCDC of HPA/PHW where an animal-associated source is suspected. These outbreak investigations variously involve collaboration with other organisations, including the Environmental Health departments of Local Authorities and the Health and Safety Executive. Determination of phage type (PT), Verocytotoxin (VT) type and comparison of human and animal isolates by pulsed field gel electrophoresis (PFGE) and variable number of tandem repeat (VNTR) analysis are performed by the E. coli / Shigella / Yersinia / Vibrio Reference Unit of the Laboratory of Gastrointestinal Pathogens, HPA Centre for Infections, Colindale. If isolates from animals circumstantially implicated in outbreaks have the same PT and indistinguishable PFGE or VNTR profiles from human cases, this is taken as confirmatory evidence of a causal association. In practice, there can be minor profile variation amongst some isolates associated with an outbreak investigation. VNTR profiles of strains within an outbreak can also show variation at a single tandem repeat locus; application of this method is under development. Other VTEC O157 PTs may be detected incidentally during the investigation of animal premises."
excerptArr[159]="Listeria monocytogenes was isolated from the faeces of two pet corvids (crows), which belonged to a woman who had been hospitalised with encephalitic listeriosis. Extensive investigations by environmental health officers had not identified a likely food-source for the human infection. The pet crows were considered a possible source as they were kept inside the house and permitted to fly around, out of their enclosure, on occasion. Definitive identification of the human and crow isolates revealed the involvement of an identical serotype, Listeria monocytogenes serotype 1/2a."
excerptArr[160]="A breeder-finisher pig herd in the South West of England had experienced increasing reproductive problems since the end of 2010 with pigs found to be not pregnant, and the birth of mummified, stillborn, or weakly piglets from older sows.  In May 2011, kidney from a jaundiced neonatal piglet tested positive for pathogenic leptospires using PCR. Molecular sequencing was not able to definitively identify the serovar of the leptospire from this piglet, but strong serological evidence of exposure to Leptospira Pomona was detected in the sows. Leptospires were successfully cultured from wild rodents and insectivores living around the pig buildings and fields and two serovars were identified; L. Pomona and L. Canicola.  Culture from pigs was not attempted as they had been treated. The unit buys in replacement breeding pigs and a cohort of gilts and boars tested on entry were seronegative, supporting the likelihood that infection was acquired on the unit. Although the unit farrows indoors there was opportunity for contact with wildlife, as during warmer months dry sows run outside during the day and at night they are housed in large yards. Control measures were put in place on the unit, including antimicrobial treatment and vaccination which has reportedly resulted in an improvement in reproductive performance in the herd. All pigs leaving the farm go to slaughter and no other units are known to be infected."
excerptArr[161]="Between July and September 2011 outbreaks of septicaemia in pre-weaned pigs due to Klebsiella pneumoniae subsp. pneumoniae were diagnosed on six separate outdoor breeding herds. K. pneumoniae subsp. pneumoniae is recognised as a cause of sporadic disease in individual pigs often concurrent with other diseases. In addition, the organism is an opportunistic pathogen causing mastitis in cows and sows. K. pneumoniae is a commensal of the healthy porcine alimentary tract and is present within the environment both in soil and water sources. The cause of the emergence of K. pneumoniae subsp. pneumoniae resulting in outbreaks of disease in piglets rather than sporadic disease remains unknown."
excerptArr[162]="Increased mortality and cull rate was observed in immature (8-28 days of age) red-legged partridges. Multiple birds developed neurological signs of in-coordination and head tilt, and had difficulty feeding and drinking. Post.mortem examination of birds showing typical clinical signs identified histopathological lesions consistent with listerial encephalitis and Listeria monocytogenes was cultured from the brain tissue. This presentation of listeriosis in poultry was considered unusual, both in terms of the number of birds affected and also as the presentation was one of encephalitis rather than septicaemia.  Although not confirmed, it was considered possible that the hatchery was the source of infection."
excerptArr[163]="A total of 200 campylobacter isolates (mainly from ruminant abortion cases) were identified by the AHVLA - Winchester laboratory during 2011: there were 123 isolates from ovines, 62 bovine, eight avian, six porcine and one feline isolate. Eighty six (70%) of the ovine isolates were C. fetus fetus, compared to 76% in 2010, with the remaining 37 (30%) a mixture of enteric strains (24% in 2010). Of the 62 bovine isolates, 30 (48%) were C. fetus venerealis intermedius compared to 45% in 2010, five (8%) were C. fetus fetus (8% in 2010) and two (3%) C. fetus venerealis (3% in 2010). The remaining 25 (40% of bovine isolates which is a similar percentage to 2010) were a mixture of enteric (thermophilic) strains."
excerptArr[164]="The investigation of the UK pork food chain for the presence of HEV (part of the EU project VITAL/OZ0147) continued with the analysis of results obtained from samples collected at different points of the chain. In the slaughterhouse, five of 40 pigs were found to be shedding HEV in their faeces, and one of 40 pig livers were positive for HEV. HEV was not detected in any of the 40 muscle samples collected in the processing point, but was detected in one of 10 surface swabs. At the point of retail sale HEV was detected in six of 63 pork sausages, and in two of eight surface swabs.  None of the HEV detected was shown to be infectious when inoculated onto conventional and 3D in vitro cultures."
excerptArr[165]="Across Wales, the campaign to raise awareness of hydatid disease will continue with information packs and leaflets available. The Welsh Government will also be present at various agricultural shows to further publicise the prevention of disease and promote good worming practice for dogs throughout Wales."
excerptArr[166]="During 2011, a total of 346 clinical specimens were examined by real-time PCR for the presence of pathogenic leptospires.  The specimens were from a range of mammalian species but mainly cattle and pig fetal kidneys. Of the 280 samples suitable for testing, one (0.6%) of 172 bovine samples (0.7% in 2010) and two (1.9%) porcine samples (0.8% in 2010) were positive. The numbers are too few to reach any firm conclusions but there is no field evidence to suggest that leptospirosis is a significant clinical animal health problem in England or Wales, although this will be in part because of the level of vaccination currently undertaken."
excerptArr[167]="M. avium was isolated from pigs (32), red deer (6), and an alpaca (1). M. microti was isolated from alpaca (6), a llama (1) and a pig (1). Other isolates were M. fortuitum from a goat (1), a pig (1) and a sheep (1) and unclassified mycobacteria were isolated from pigs (55), alpaca (4), llama (1) and a sheep (1)."
excerptArr[168]="Additionally in 2011, PCR detected the presence of C. burnetii in placental or uterine material from a further five submissions (two cattle, two sheep and one goat) presented to AHVLA regional laboratories for abortion investigation. In these cases Q fever was not considered to be contributing to the clinical problem although the potential zoonotic hazard was highlighted."
excerptArr[169]="Streptococcus suis type 2 again predominated although there was an increase in the number of identifications of S. suis type 1/2."
excerptArr[170]="During 2011, 285 (43.5%) of 655 sheep sera received (from 152 separate submissions) tested positive for T. gondii. This compares to 340 (43.5%) positive sera from 781 samples (171 submissions) received in 2010. In goats, 25 (54.3%) of 46 goat sera (12 submissions) tested positive for T. gondii. One of two dog sera (from two separate submissions) tested positive. No pig samples were received during 2011."
excerptArr[171]="In March, VLA assistance was requested in the investigation of three cases of cryptosporidiosis in children who visited an open farm in Lancashire. Advice was given in conjunction with the private veterinary surgeon on procedures to reduce the risk of zoonotic infection according to existing guidelines, but animal sampling was not undertaken."
excerptArr[172]="Investigations in 2011 are shown in the below. Further details can be found in the quarterly (Q2 and Q3) reports. Open farm (Cumbria, May): Lambs – VTEC O157 not isolated from pooled sample. Mobile zoo (NE England, June): Small mammals and a reptile – VTEC O157 not isolated. Open Farm (E. Yorks, July): Animal sampling not undertaken. Household outbreak (S Wales, Sept): Family pet dog – VTEC O157 not isolated. Food premises (E. Anglia, Oct): Pet rabbit – VTEC O157 not isolated"
excerptArr[173]="A single case of Corynebacterium ulcerans (please see Q1 report)"
excerptArr[174]="A case of listerioisis in an individual who kept crows as pets (see section 1.3)"
excerptArr[175]="A cluster of human cases of psittacosis in West Yorkshire"
excerptArr[176]="Human campylobacteriosis due to thermophilic campylobacters is a major cause of food poisoning, although non-thermophylic strains (such as C. fetus) can also (rarely) cause severe systemic zoonotic illness. A total of 273 campylobacter isolates (mainly from ruminant abortion cases) were identified by the VLA during 2010: 202 were from ovines, 60 bovine, 8 avian, 1 red deer, 1 equine and 1 kangaroo. One hundred and fifty three (76%) of the ovine isolates were C. fetus fetus, compared to 63% in 2009, with the remaining 49 (24%) a mixture of enteric strains (37% in 2009). Of the 34 (57%) venereal bovine isolates, 27 (45%) were C. fetus venerealis intermedius compared to 33% in 2009, 5 (8%) were C. fetus fetus (15% in 2009) and 2 (3%) C. fetus venerealis (9% in 2009). The remaining 26 (43%) (same % as in 2009) were a mixture of enteric (thermophilic) strains. Isolates from avian species comprised 5 (63%) C. jejuni and 3 (37%) C. coli. Isolates from miscellaneous species were all C. jejuni."
excerptArr[177]="The majority of the VLA HEV activity in 2010 related to the EU FP7 project VITAL, which seeks to devise a monitoring system for virus contamination of food, supported by the results of virus detection in samples of food from production through to point of sale. The VLA collected and tested samples of pig products from abattoirs, processing plants and retail outlets. In addition a team of food safety experts from within the VITAL consortium conducted an audit at each premises from which samples were obtained, accompanied by completion of an extensive questionnaire by local managers. All sample types were tested with real-time standardized PCR protocols for HEV (target virus) and Porcine Adenovirus (PAdV - indicator of faecal contamination). HEV was detected at different levels in samples from the production phase and from the point of sale. In-vitro studies are ongoing to determine the viability of the HEV detected in these samples. PAdV was detected only in the production phase, both from pig samples and from environmental swabs collected. The VITAL PhD study to inform virus elimination procedures is currently examining the effect of UV and chemical disinfection of surfaces on the inactivation of HEV, using the 3D in-vitro propagation method."
excerptArr[178]="The Welsh Assembly Government hydatid control scheme continued for a third year in the south Powys region of Wales. The results from the preceding two years indicate that the prevalence of infection in dogs may be stable, rather than increasing as previously thought. The prevalence of infection of Echinococcus granulosus among farm dogs was about 10%, with one or more infected dogs detected on 20% of farms. There is also evidence of clustering of infected farms within the control area. There appears to be no current evidence for transmission to humans at these farm dog prevalence levels. However, we should be wary of dismissing the risk of transmission to humans as cases can take decades to become apparent. The regional control and awareness scheme continues."
excerptArr[179]="In 2010, a total of 508 specimens from a range of mammalian species (mainly cattle and pig fetal kidneys) in E & W were examined by real-time PCR for pathogenic leptospires. Of the 432 samples suitable for testing, two (0.71%) of 282 bovine samples (0.4% in 2009) and one (0.76%) porcine samples (none in 2009) were positive. In addition, one sample from a water vole tested positive. The numbers are too few to reach any conclusions but there is no field evidence to suggest that leptospirosis is a significant animal health problem in England or Wales."
excerptArr[180]="M. avium was isolated from pigs (36), alpaca (3), and red deer (1). M. microti was isolated from alpaca (5) and pigs (2). Other isolates were M. fortuitum from pigs (2), M. celatum from a pig (1), M. gordonae from pigs (3) and M. szulgai from pigs (4). Unclassified mycobacteria were isolated from alpaca (3), pigs (68), sheep (1) and roe deer (1)."
excerptArr[181]="Streptococcus suis type 2 again predominated."
excerptArr[182]="In sheep in 2010, 340 (44%) of 781 sera tested (from 171 separate submissions) were positive for T.gondii compared with 321 (44%) of 732 sera (from 174 submissions) in 2009. In pigs, 26 (27%) of 97 sera (two submissions) were positive. In other species, 8 (30%) of 27 samples (15 submissions), tested positive."
excerptArr[183]="A PCR survey using abortion material collected from randomly selected abortion submissions during 2010/11where Q fever was not suspected is still in progress. Testing of 192 ovine cotyledons, all from different farms did not reveal any positives which indicates that prevalence in the sample population is less than 1% (95% confidence). Testing of samples from other species (cattle, goats, South American camelids and pigs) will be completed by the end of March 2011."
excerptArr[184]="A 12 month survey of verocytotoxigenic (VTEC) O157 in camelids using  samples submitted to VLA regional laboratories 2009-2010 suggested that the prevalence in these species (approximately 2 %) was not significantly different to other farmed species. This survey was initiated following the detection of VTEC O157 in a significant number of camelids examined during human outbreak investigations on premises open to the public 1997-2007 (Pritchard and others 2009, Veterinary Record 164, 545-549). A short account is being prepared for publication."
excerptArr[185]="There was only one investigation in 2010. In May, the VLA assisted a local HPU with the investigation of an outbreak of cryptosporidiosis linked to an open farm in the North of England. Faecal samples were collected from a group of guinea pigs that were identified by the Outbreak Control Team as a possible source of infection. All of 14 samples tested were negative using the sensitive fluorescent antibody test. Sheep were considered to be the probable source of human infection."
excerptArr[186]="VLA assisted in the investigation of two outbreaks involving non-verocytotoxigenic strains of E.coli O157, PT1, only one of which involved animal sampling."
